July 21st, I believe, and we're in a very beautiful setting at Lancaster Place, you call this?
Yeah, I guess.
And getting ready to ask Bill Lancaster to recall his memories of being here.
Now, Bill, use your mic and let's see if it's working.
Hello, can you, is it working okay?
All right.
Okay.
When did your family first get to College Station?
My father came down here as a single person in 1920 from Fort Collins.
He was in the Extension Service.
Now, he didn't start out at Fort Collins.
He entered the University of Missouri, by the way, in about 1912, after a year or two, transferred to Kansas State.
And I guess it was in the agriculture, if it was
If it was definitive enough back then, it would have been agronomy, but I suspect it was a general agricultural degree.
He went into the extension service.
He wanted a military career is what he wanted.
He was the cadet colonel at Kansas State after he'd been in the military, but he didn't get that just before World War I and went into the extension service.
First was in Idaho.
and then to Fort Collins where my mother was also in the Ag Extension Service.
But he came down here in 1920.
They were married in 1921 and got involved in the development of this area here.
I'm not sure how.
He had no money and I have no idea how in the world he got involved in development with Dr. F.B.
Clark.
who lived next door here.
About when did they start the development of this bit of real estate?
Oh, it was 20 or 21.
Oh, really?
Yeah, I had one of the original plats with a date on it.
As a matter of fact, my mother and father built the first house in this area, which would have been the first house off the campus at the time.
the house, not this house, but a house that was on this lot and the house next door which was ultimately occupied by Pink Downs.
Those two houses were built at the same time in the spring of 22 and by Clarence Andrews and Brian and the
Park area, College Park as it's called, began with that development.
Other houses, by 1929 or 30, there were probably 25 or 30 houses down here in this area.
As far as you know, was it a wooded area?
Oh yes, yes.
This is described in an article in the Dallas News, 1926 article, as a mosquito infested, rat infested,
boondoggle place, and why would anybody want to go down there in the first place off the campus, but there was a lake.
They dredged all this out and made a lake down here and had Fritz Hensel, F.W.
Hensel Sr., who was the college landscape architect at the time, laid the thing out, the streets and
was involved in, well there wasn't any landscaping development but I guess the clearing if you have it that way and laying out of the streets and what not.
But the general appearance improved, but it's interesting to note that in that article it was not very complimentary of the land in the first place, but it did improve.
Now, as far as I'm aware, most of the professional employees, be the faculty or staff, lived on campus.
Yes, yes.
Did you ever hear from your family whether anybody in any position of authority on the campus frowned on someone living off?
Was it okay to live off campus?
Yes.
As far as I know, the housing was very, very tight.
I think probably by 1930, I think the last house was built on campus in 1930.
None had been built before that time, probably World War I type.
campus was crowded and I think just by guessing I'd say they welcomed this.
So that a newcomer might not be able to find a place on campus.
Oh definitely not as a matter of fact it was we're talking department heads and deans and whatnot and now some of the maintenance people had their area which was over near the power plant the current power plant in that area
They had their houses, but as far as the main area, which is in the block now occupied by the Memorial Student Center, we're talking about deans and department heads and whatnot, and there just wasn't any other housing available.
And I presume, were there any houses that were kind of designated for deans?
Was there a priority?
Yes.
Now, a friend of mine, Knox Walker, who lived on the campus, has a lot of that lined out and you'll want to talk with him.
And yes, there was definitely a priority on it.
Somebody, I can't think now.
talked about the house that he was assigned.
It was just a terrible place and that's why Hila in the world was that.
I can't remember now who it was.
Was there housing at Northgate then at all?
Not much, no.
There was the apartment building.
I don't know who's in it now.
There's an eating establishment in it now near the campus theater.
It was there and there was an apartment and there were a few farmhouses north of that, but essentially there was not faculty housing at the north gate.
And the highway was then what we now call the Welburn Road.
Yes, yes.
And so that over where Texas Avenue is and what some of us used to call East Gate, that didn't exist.
No, no.
That was just, I presume, pasture land.
Yes.
If even used for pastures.
Yes, yes.
Highway 6 came in early 30s.
And, of course, the university turned around at that point and faced east instead of west.
Right.
So you grew up on this piece of real estate.
Yes.
I was born here.
And another house that was here is down the street now at 505.
Literally, were you born?
Three out of the five of us were born at home.
Did the doctor come to the house?
Yes, Dr. J.E.
Marsh, who's the father of the J.E.
Marsh practicing in Bryan now.
was the college physician, and he attended the birth.
Our two older brothers and sisters were born in Bryan, an older brother and an older sister, born in St.
Joseph Hospital in Bryan, but the three younger ones were born at home.
I believe Jim Cashin told me that he was born on campus at Dr. Marsh, and Dr. Marsh lived on campus?
Yes, yes.
Now, there was no facility for overnight hospital care on the campus or anything, was there?
Well, there were rooms in the hospital, yes.
Were there?
Yes, uh-huh.
Okay.
Now, how many or what, but yes, there were,
But the time I have a recollection of it, there were hospital beds, yes, there in that hospital.
All right, describe for me then growing up in this, where were playmates and school and so forth?
Well, I was born in 28, which was,
you know, eight years after this thing all began.
So there were houses here and our lives pretty well centered on the lake down here.
We built rafts and fishing whatever there was.
In fact, some of my mother's sterling silver is at the bottom of that lake.
I've tried to since find it since it was drained.
We'd go out on the raft and have a picnic or something but one time there was a disaster when we lost some of my mother's good stuff.
Of course we went on the campus, a lot of the social life was centered on the campus as you might well know.
The YMCA was the center of everything.
Well, before the MSC came along, everything happened.
There was even a swimming pool in the YMCA.
There was a swimming pool built later, the P.L.
Downs Natatorium, which was built in 1932.
Summertime, we just spent all our time there.
I mean, for $3, the family could spend every day of the summer up there, you know.
But we...
Whatever kids did back then, we did here.
You began first grade where?
On campus.
Where was the school?
It was the east end of Joe Rout Boulevard.
There was a building, a stucco building there, which had been built in 1920 or 21.
The university provided that, I think, as a wing of their education department.
It was under the tutelage somehow of the education department.
and I guess got some state funding, but that was the whole school for the college station system.
By the time I got there,
I entered school in 34 in the first grade, and the university had given the school system Pfeiffer Hall, which just before being torn down and demolished, it should have been.
In fact, the kids almost demolished it themselves, but that was the high school by the time I entered first grade in 1934.
I never reached there.
Now, we moved off campus in Christmas of 39, and I was in the seventh grade then when we went to the area over here.
In the first grade, who were your fellow students?
Were they all A&M related?
Yes, or this of course was the consolidated school system.
Now we brought in students.
So there were country kids.
Oh yes, yes indeed.
Now somehow Welburn had grades one through three and they didn't join us until the fourth grade.
There were other Union Hill, Rock Prairie, places of that nature that were imported, I guess, from the first grade on.
But I can remember some of these kids, non-college associated people in the first grade with me.
But Knox Walker was one.
I mentioned his name a while ago.
E.L.
Williams' son, who used to be head of the Industrial Education Department.
Rattan, Tommy Rattan, there was a girl by the name of Lillian Hornick whose father, they were Czechoslovakian, and he ran a uniform place at the North Gate.
Now, Henry Gilchrist told me that when the Gilchrist moved over here in 37, that his father gave him a bicycle as a kind of a bribe to make him accept the move because they had a new house in Austin.
They'd only been in about a year, and when they came over here, he and his mother thought they'd gone to the wilderness.
They had.
And he said that...
His father, he called it speedometer.
He had a speedometer on the bike and he said he put 900 miles on it the first three months because he said he rode that bike everywhere.
I think I remember that bicycle.
Now you know they built, I say the last house was built on campus in 1930.
They built a house for Mr. Gilchrist.
in 37, which is the, now they call it the chancellor's home.
That white frame house?
No, no, no, it's where Male and Southern are living.
That's what I mean, yeah, that white frame house.
It's brick, oh yeah, white brick.
Oh, okay.
They built that in 37 for Mr. Gilchrist as dean of engineering.
Now, if they lived somewhere else before that was ready, I'm not aware of it.
They could have temporarily lived somewhere else.
That should have been the place that Henry remembered because it was a nice place.
Your classmates then, there were some farm kids and some campus.
Oh yes, definitely.
Do you remember how many were in the first grade?
Was it one room or two?
Oh no, it was one room.
It was a large room on the first floor of this building.
There were 29 of us who graduated.
I remember that in 1945, 11 years.
Oh, that's a good benchmark.
11 years later.
Now, we were a small class because there were classes both ahead of us and behind us that had in the 30s.
And why ours was so small, I have no earthly idea.
But it was later divided as we moved up.
Let's see, in the fourth grade, let's see, we were together.
Fourth grade was split.
Fifth grade we were together.
The sixth grade we were split.
So it must have enlarged by that time.
I can't imagine them splitting.
Now the teachers, were most of the teachers faculty wives?
Yes, except the first grade teacher was Mrs. Sloop, Mrs. Fred L. Sloop.
How do you spell them?
Sloop.
S-L-O-O-P.
Now she is well known or was in the educational circles and I expect still is as a phonetics expert.
She has books.
She's written books on it and I know for years
the Sloop method was used in the phonetic, you may be familiar with it or may have heard of it, but that was Mrs. Sloop and that was a very wonderful teacher.
Were there some other unforgettable teachers that you can easily recall?
Really, the teachers I remember were all
Good teachers, Mrs. Holzman, who died at 102 not long ago here, was the third grade teacher and had been there for, well, goodness knows how long, but she was a lovable person.
My second grade teacher was a Mrs. Sims, who I don't believe was here long, but she was somebody that we all liked.
Mrs. Heaton, Homer Heaton's wife, was our sixth grade teacher.
She was a very pleasant person.
She was more stern.
She was a sterner person than what we'd been used to, but a good teacher.
No, I don't recall.
Really, I can remember my brothers and sisters talking about some high school teachers.
Alfred Chalk's wife was a good teacher, but I think very, very firm.
Ethel Burgess was an English teacher.
You know, she was the president's daughter and was a very lovable, you know, teacher.
And really I don't, I think we were very fortunate probably in having good quality teachers at the time.
And in those elementary years particularly,
Did it seem to matter at school or on the playground what role your father played at A&M?
Not really.
I wasn't aware of it.
Now, I think the kids from off campus felt displaced a little bit, but I think
Some of my later on better friends were kids whose parents were not associated with the university, country kids as we called them back then.
But I think they felt probably, I don't know what a good word would be,
I don't think it was a deserved placing.
I think we took them in just like everybody else.
If that was our privilege, it's probably a presumption on my part to say that, but I think we all got along real fine.
Were there, in your family, were there any rules that your parents gave you about going to and from school, things you were not to do, places you were not to go?
place to go.
No, you just got there and got back.
Were you expected to come straight home and change clothes and then?
Yes, yes, yes.
If we went somewhere, we had to get permission.
A friend of mine was, my father was an extension service and his father was an extension service and they lived at the North Gate.
And if I went to his house, I'd have to get permission, or if he came down here, we did.
Incidentally, my father was on the third floor of the Extension Service building, which is now the Trigon, as you know it.
There was one telephone up there on that floor.
And one of the most impressive things about my friends, his father was the vice director down on the first floor.
One of the most impressive things in that office was the fact that he had a telephone on his desk.
It was not only just a telephone, it was what we called a French phone, a cradle-type phone, no dial, of course.
But that to me was, you know, very impressionable.
You know, here my father was a professional person, but, you know, the telephone was across the hall in a janitorial closet over there.
And if it rang, somebody would go answer it and yell to whoever it was for.
Do you remember when your family got their first telephone?
We always had one.
Did you?
Yes.
No, it was before my time.
I can remember when we first got a cradle phone, you know, that's what you call it, a French phone or what have you.
The other one, of course, was the candlestick phone.
And the number please.
That's right.
Party line and so forth.
That's exactly right, yes sir.
Let's see, were there any, what about you youngsters,
dabbling around in the dormitories, did you, little boys and girls, ever do anything on campus?
Not in the dorms.
Now what would happen at the end of the year
the students would clean out their stuff and throw it out on them and we'd love to go through oh you have all kinds of fountain pens and pencils and alarm clocks and all sorts of things that interested us that were even then during the depression period I look back and I'm amazed at some of the things that were thrown away
But, and then there was a big trash box behind the exchange store building which is now Heaton Hall.
But, and we'd, they'd throw out some remarkable things sometimes and we'd crawl up into that box and rummage through that sometime.
But, now we'd go through the steam tunnels
which, you know, weren't supposed to do.
We got older, you know, as little kids.
We did them in high school.
We'd rummage around in the steam tunnels, and what worse the Aggies did too.
We'd get on top of the academic building.
Of course, it was accessible.
Sometimes they would lock.
There was a cage on the fourth floor that would keep you from getting up there, but when it was unlocked, which was quite often,
We'd get on top of the academic building and, you know, it was just a good place to go and see things.
Now, I've heard President Rutter talk about Prexy's Moon and that supposedly, if I remember correctly, that it was considered a real cool thing if you were a cadet to try to shoot out that light bulb.
Indeed.
Is that right?
Yes, indeed.
That was on top of the dome of the academic building.
That's right.
And I presume then there must have been some holes
in that dome, maybe, where somebody had missed?
Bound to be, however.
I never did it myself.
I did climb to the top of the water tower one time, which was quite a daring thing.
How old were you then, do you know?
Well, we were high school.
I was probably a junior in high school or something, but three boys and a girl climbed up there.
Now, I didn't go beyond the railing that went around it.
And my sister went to the very top one time.
I wasn't with her, but I wasn't that daring.
That was pretty precarious.
Did the whistle blow in all those years?
Yes, sir.
Jack Williams did away with that.
Eight, twelve, one and five?
Yes, sir.
He said it sounded too much like a prison or an institution or something.
Oh, yes, indeed.
Then they used that many years ago as the fire whistle.
Right, that I remember.
That woo, woo, woo, woo, that was weird.
You heard that in the middle of the night.
It would scare the living daylights out of you.
They got a siren later that sounded better.
Were there any places of entertainment anywhere within close proximity to the campus that you youngsters were not supposed to visit?
Oh, I don't think.
May have been there.
I never heard about them.
Uncle Ed's is out here on the highway.
Students went there to drink beer.
Describe Uncle Ed's.
Well, actually the property, to go back a little bit,
the five men who developed College Park bought these 85 acres from Ed Hardlicka and his sister, Mrs. Schwartz.
So they owned quite a bit of land here.
But Uncle Ed's was just a wooden spot.
I guess it had a wooden floor to it.
Pretty much of a joint.
It was on Welborn Road.
Yeah, Welborn Road.
Right far down the way.
Near Luther Street.
In fact, the Hardlicker house, their home was at the intersection of Welborn Road and Luther Street facing west.
And then next to it and closer to the road, the house was set back a little bit.
But closer to the road was this
I guess it was a filling station, gas, you know, a few little groceries.
How many people could be seated at one time?
Oh, I wouldn't think more than 50 or so at the most, at the most.
Did he serve hamburgers, barbecue with their food?
I think he did.
I must, I'll have to admit, I don't think I was ever in there.
And it was beer, not whiskey.
Beer, yeah.
Now Brazos County was what they called damp at the time.
It was served beer, but not whiskey.
Now, were A&M students, was it okay for them to go there?
They went.
Okay, I don't know.
I don't think I've heard of any rule which prohibited it.
And there was nothing else.
There was nothing else.
Now, Bryan, of course, had some places, but I don't remember...
Anything in particular that would attract A&M students, it might have been the fact that I just wasn't old enough to have heard about it, but even later, I don't remember, Brian had his joints, his beer joints and things.
I don't recall any one of them that was frequented by biennium students.
I've not heard much about that either, that that was so far away.
Yeah.
And they didn't have wheels.
That's right.
Now, would the students sometimes walk to hard lickers?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, that's the only way to get there, really.
No, the student cars on campus, I expect you could count with one hand.
That's what I thought, that was very few.
Yeah.
As you look back on those elementary and junior, senior high years, I know that wasn't divided into junior, senior high then, how would you summarize the quality of the A&M Consolidated School that you attended?
Of course, it's the only school I ever attended, so I,
Looking back, I would think it was probably pretty good, thinking of the quality of the teachers that we had.
Now, whether, you know, I have no idea how it ranked among, you know, the state standards and whatnot, but I'm just thinking of
the people who gave it direction, the school board and the superintendent, the principals.
By and large, who made up the school board?
Was it campus folks?
Yes.
Now, there was always a criteria or an agreement, I doubt if it was a written agreement, that there would always be a representative from one of the outlying, I think probably more than one, probably at least two representatives.
There was always one from Welburn.
And there was one from either Union Hill or Rock Prairie somewhere who I think this was an understanding that it would always be that way.
The rest of them were university people.
Now did you have, in high school, did you have science?
Did you have chemistry, physics?
No, we had a science course.
Mr. Bunning taught this.
I was in high school the exact war years, 41 through 45, so we were slighted, I expect, in quality of teaching.
What about languages?
I had Spanish, I took Spanish, nothing other than that.
I think this science course was there, there was no chemistry.
It was a general science, I think, was the only thing of that nature.
And you said there were 29 who graduated.
Were most of those college related?
Yes, I think so.
And as you got out of high school, what did you think you were going to do the rest of your life?
Well, for me, it was just inevitable that you go to Texas A&M, you know, it was just a foregone conclusion, and I think that was the case with most of us.
I find it strange in my own class, when I look like at Henry Gilchrist's class and some fore and aft, there was one PhD in our class, no MDs,
I'm sure several masters, but only one PhD, no MDs at all, and I don't think any lawyers.
I don't know what happened to our bunch, but you know.
They had some college-degreed parents.
Yes, yes, very definitely.
I think in Henry's class, they had doctors, lawyers, school administrators, you know, just...
And Henry was two years, three years older than I. He was in the 45, he must have been class of 42.
And, but in that particular class and others, there were doctors and lawyers and whatnot, but ours just, I don't know what happened to it.
You went your first grades on the campus.
Yes.
Then you move off campus when?
We left there and when we departed school,
the Christmas holidays in 1939 we took all our books and things home.
I have a very vivid recollection of Mrs. Heaton inspecting all the desks and everything to make sure we took everything out and we went home and then after the holidays we reported to the new school over here on Timber Street which was oh marvelous a beautiful place.
Timber and
and uh uh well well yeah uh not not welburn uh jersey jersey street yeah yes uh and were all 11 grade 12 grades in the same building then no no no no in fact they were separate buildings the for uh first grade